[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>BEN STEWART: The mind.
Is that the last frontier?
That's the whole thing
about transhumanism
is you have to really boil down,
what does it mean to be human?
We can disembody ourselves and
become part of that one mind.
That's what I'm looking
at technology as, is like,
is this something of our
design, or is it something
that is wanting us to build it?
A lot of people are saying,
we are building and coding
our own prison planet,
our own slave planet that
knows every move that we make.
Can we even use video
of somebody committing
a crime against them anymore?
Sorry, no, because
of deepfakes, there's
always reasonable doubt.
Nothing will beat
what biology gave us.
That's what I really feel.
And understand this.
We've got this.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Transhumanism
is a juicy but frightening
topic for many of
us, and we're going
to take a deep dive into
it today with Ben Stewart.
We'll begin with what
it is understood to be,
how it is moving into our
lives in ubiquitous ways,
and how we need to take
back our sovereignty.
That's a lot in 45 minutes, Ben.
But you can do it.
>>STEWART: Well, let's hop in.
I just want to say it's an
honor to be back on the show.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
You know, everyone
loved the show.
I guess that's why we're
back together again, right?
The numbers speak.
>>STEWART: By popular demand.
>>REGINA: They loved the
conversation last time,
so let's make it
good this time too.
>>STEWART: Great.
>>REGINA: And let's
dive right into it.
First of all, for
people who don't
have a broad understanding
of what transhumanism
is, because it's really
bandied about in so
many different
ways, just give us
a description of
transhumanism to lay the base.
>>STEWART: Sure.
Transhumanism, even if
you type it into Google,
it's a philosophical
movement believing
that science and technology
can do a couple things.
Can ameliorate all
suffering, and therefore
solve the problem of the
human condition apparently.
And then on top
of that, it's also
enhancing the human experience.
And that's also
getting into, what
can bliss be if we add senses?
Not just replace
senses that are--
like eyesight and hearing
that's going bad--
>>REGINA: Expand.
>>STEWART: Expand on the senses
and make for a more blissful
human experience.
So that's the main thing you
get when you go to Google.
>>REGINA: Well, I mean,
it sounds utopian,
so what could go wrong?
>>STEWART: Right.
Yeah.
I love those utopian ideals.
So I think there's a negative
and a positive polarity.
And I hate making things
usually that simple,
but I would say more on the
negative side or the side that
maybe isn't as well informed
with it is the belief that we
can, let's say, skirt the
accountability of our biology,
and things like pain being
a messenger from nature,
that if you listen to
and you listen well,
it's almost like having an
altercation with a lover.
If you listen well with
nonviolent communication,
you can get to the
bottom of something
and really have a
healing catalyst emerge.
But if you can just hit
the mute button, like,
I'm tired of hearing this
and you hit the mute button,
or pump a little
MDMA into the body
so you don't feel
that pain or you
want to feel blissed
out, it can be,
in a sense, a circumvention
of accountability
of what biology gave us.
But the grand thought
of it is those
are all pesky fetters or
chains to what we used to be.
Let's start looking more
at what we could be.
But what I would say the more
positive side of transhumanism
would be even what the
Buddha was all about,
transcending the human
condition through the work.
Not by finding
something, outsourcing
the problem, and so we can
just have an easier life,
but also what a shaman
would do with a drum,
chanting words, using
words, and this ritual thing
to, in a sense,
transcend the human body
so they can become animalistic
or something beyond what they
are temporarily,
but then return.
This is an archaic
form of transformation.
>>REGINA: I was
going to say, it's
often called enlightenment.
>>STEWART: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: OK.
So the word transhuman
has now become
hardwired in with
hard technology.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Basically.
Nano or whatever.
Yeah.
>>STEWART: For the most part.
And it's also the idea that
our consciousness is not
bound by our biology.
Therefore, it can be enhanced
with technology that can do
what biology can't.
And you break
something on your body.
Don't worry.
The new Armomatic
5000 is coming,
and same with all the organs.
We already have
pacemakers that are smart.
We have smart insulin
pumps, and then now
insulin and glucagon pumps.
Obviously, the neural lace
technology that is evolving,
and I have thoughts on that.
These are all things that are
wrapped around the philosophy
of, we don't need a body.
We can disembody ourselves and
become part of that one mind.
Going back to-- as an
anthropologist, Teilhard
de Chardon or Chardin
I think was his name.
C-H-A-R-D-I-N. Anyway, he was
the first one to coin this idea
of the noosphere.
It's a layer of just the
mind, the singular mind.
And so a lot of
people are saying,
well, that's the internet, and
that'll be cloud computing.
And that's where
we're heading now
with smart cities, smart
everything, everything smart.
All technology has to be smart.
>>REGINA: And connected.
>>STEWART: And connected, and
computed somewhere, right?
And so that's the big thing
is we have phones on our end,
and we love it because of all
the things it does for us.
But on the opposite end
of that is big data,
AI and cloud computing,
by people and algorithms
that we have no clue about,
and we're also not allowed to.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
That will always
remain in the shadow.
And you know, to me, there's
one big question philosophically
here.
If you were to look into the
teams of people who originally
began working with AI and
then continued through some
of the famous educational
institutions and such,
I would want to
ask this question.
How many of them are
dyed-in-the-wool atheists,
dust to dust, and so
this is your only hope?
Because my research early on
in this 10 years ago was that
made up the body of it.
There were very
few people that I
could identify with deep,
spiritual interest in practice
that we're looking into,
committing themselves
to the development of AI.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
It's interesting you
say that, because when
I started with what
is transhumanism,
it's a philosophical movement.
And I really look at these--
I call them artifacts
of consciousness.
And some call them the
pillars of society.
It's science, philosophy,
religion, and art.
You'll find them
in every society
as far back in time or
across the globe as possible.
It seems to be this thing that
even down to the individual,
we all have our inner
scientist, philosopher.
In religion, I would say
it's our devotee, what
we become devoted to.
And then art is
the way we express,
and there's a
refinement process.
But when you mentioned the
atheism really driving the bus
on a lot of this
transhumanism, it
may have even started
well earlier than that.
And I also believe there
is a resurgence of a form
of religion around technology.
And--
>>REGINA: And tell
us about that.
>>STEWART: Well, in
today's day and age,
it's super hard to know what
media that I'm coming to see
is real, fake, staged,
put different words to,
different narratives to.
But there's stuff around--
I'm not going to go
too much into names,
but let's say the Googles
and the big tech industries
with seemingly
well-formed seances
in their courtyards in a very
cultish, religious fashion.
So I'm not going to--
>>REGINA: Are you being literal?
>>STEWART: Yes, a
video that I saw.
>>REGINA: This is literal?
>>STEWART: Well, this is a
literal video that I saw.
But here's where I will
also back off of that.
I've also seen tons of
videos where at first blush,
I'm like, whoa, that
paints a very dark,
grim picture of just
whatever I'm watching.
And then it comes out later
that, yeah, that was completely
faked to see who bites.
So what I try and
do in these interims
is I wouldn't doubt it
that religion is making
a form of resurgence
through technology,
as if what's being built
here is not just gods.
>>REGINA: You mean a
devotion to the technology
itself is the religion.
>>STEWART: A devotion to the
technology as if it's a being.
No longer just something
that we've created,
not just something that will sit
around and maybe in thousands
of years people
will discover what
we were up to, but something
that legitimately supplants
who we are as humanity.
So that's the whole
thing about transhumanism
is you have to really boil down,
what does it mean to be human?
And a lot of us, well, we
say what biology gave us,
what we've had through the past
several hundred thousands years
once humanity came online.
But then you really
think of that,
is at what point did we
start becoming the cyborg?
So a lot of us would say,
you have a cell phone?
You're already getting a lot
of your information through it.
If you don't know
information, you just
hook up with your phone
for a couple seconds
and Google will tell you.
There's ways that
you can connect
through this
technology in real time
better than we could have
imagined 40 years ago.
>>REGINA: Well, and if
you're looking at it
to supplant a library, OK.
You know, we do use outside
data to make decisions.
But if you're using
it to make decisions
of a more innate nature
as to who you are,
that's a whole
different-- that's
a different area of
engagement with technology.
I don't even know
how that would work
in terms of the
religion of technology,
when you don't trust your
own instincts at all anymore.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Well, and that's definitely
where I believe we're going.
There there's several
elements to this.
What I like about what
you just said, is we are--
so the positive side of this,
I think in transhumanism,
if you understand more of
the positive side of it,
you'll realize that it's
all about the human journey
and the lessons
that our soul will
learn in this
present incarnation,
whereas technology
for a lot of people
is outsourcing our
responsibility to technology.
Now, where does that
matter more than others?
OK.
You know, somebody loses a leg.
You put a prosthetic
limb on there,
and there's 24 different
sensors and there's
AI involved in it to make
somebody feel like, whoa,
I'm not a cyborg now.
I feel like I have my leg back.
I don't feel less human.
I just feel more like
a complete human again.
So these are interesting
positive things
that we can glean from that.
But the main part of the whole
thing about the outsourcing
of our responsibility--
>>REGINA: That's what I
was just going to say.
When you get to the
outsourcing of responsibility
and our own consciousness
and our ability
to make innate,
intuitive decisions,
now we've got a problem.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
And so the way that is being
used, for the most part,
is you see all the polarization
in politics right now,
and the factions are really
going back to this tribalism.
And I look at tribalism
not as something to blame,
but it's more or
less like a flinch.
Somebody throws a punch at you.
It doesn't land,
but you retract.
You go back to where safety is.
And I feel like that's
what tribalism does.
When times are getting weird--
and times are getting weird--
it seems exponentially
now we retreat back
to what feels the safest.
And the safest is
this whole idea
that those who look
and feel and think more
like me are on my side.
But now you take a
look at technology
is native to children.
They take to it so super
quickly that anyone
who's like, I'm going to keep
technology out of my life, how
long is that going to last?
Because they're not
going to live forever.
And when that dies
off, there may
be some new youngins
that grow up
and they want to
push technology away.
But really, it just
seems that it's just
becoming another limb.
It's becoming another
aspect of how we--
our cognition, if you will.
So with children,
taking a look at that,
it's not so foreign to them.
And in a way, that placebo
effect will allow for them
to just, how do I take
what I need and/or want
to make me feel safe?
So you see what I'm saying here.
There's tribalism
where we retreat
to what we used to know.
Me and you who were born
before this technology
got to this point,
we remember a time
when it was about the people.
But now people are feeling
more safe behind a laptop,
in front of their phone,
getting information.
>>REGINA: So you're
saying the technology
itself has become their tribe.
>>STEWART: In a way.
In a way.
And I know I will
get crap for this,
but there are a lot
of people who say,
you can't just throw one
into a bad and another
into a good category.
We really have to take a
look at, what is technology?
And so when you really barrel
down into what is technology,
we used to flint rocks so
we could make them sharp
and use them as spears.
You know, the fire would have
been the technology, and on
and on, all the way
to the smartphone
and what we have nowadays.
So we have clear lines of what
we would call a technology.
There's us.
There's biology.
That's the tribal--
like, I trust biology
because I know where
that comes from.
And then there's technology,
the things that we created,
these artifacts.
And I'm super curious
about, what is technology?
Is it sentient in some way,
even in an embryonic scale?
And there are a lot
of people who say,
I don't think it's going to
be intelligent like humans.
And I'm like, does it have
to be intelligent like humans
to have a functional outcome
that just completely transforms
humanity, maybe not
even for the best?
That's what I'm looking
at technology as, is like,
what is this?
Is this something of our design?
Or is it something that
is wanting us to build it?
>>REGINA: Well, that's a
big, esoteric question.
So on an esoteric note,
I tend to look at things
from the notion of
soul's journey, OK?
Since we each have
one and it journeys.
And I look at it in
the larger sense.
If you're a soul who's chosen
to incarnate during a time
when this becomes
the opportunity
and challenge on
the planet, we're
choosing to engage with
it on some level en masse.
And toward what end?
I mean, we were all kind of
chatting a little while ago
off camera, and the whole
notion of, which comes first?
And I think back to the
series "Battlestar Galactica,"
you know?
When you get to the end of
"Battlestar Galactica," what
gives birth to what, right?
And so I look at
it on that level,
and I think of a
little two-year-old who
the majority of their
day is spent on an iPad
or with a cell
phone in their hand.
What is the-- what is
the potential of good
that can come from that?
And what do we lose from that?
Because that is now our reality.
It used to be you'd
sit someone down
in front of "Bugs Bunny"
and a television set.
Then you'd go out and play.
This is a really
different interface
with our physical,
third-dimensional reality.
>>STEWART: It is.
And we don't know
the back end of it.
Not that we know the
back end of our biology.
That's a timeless question.
>>REGINA: Right.
It's evolving too.
Yeah.
>>STEWART: And so these
questions are great for us.
But that thing about the child
with the iPad in front of them,
my biggest concerns on
an immediate level are,
we don't know what
the infrastructure--
and we talked about this--
the 5G and then the
coming 6G infrastructure
means for our physiology.
We don't really know what
that means for our health.
In a slightly more psychological
or even an esoteric sense,
we don't know--
so there's these
goggles, and we're
seeing what looks like reality.
But literally, it's only two
inches in front of our eyes.
How do our eyes change over--
>>REGINA: Well, I'm
wondering about that.
How do you even develop
depth perception
if you never leave this space?
Simple changes to us.
>>STEWART: And now
thanks to what's
happening in the
past couple of years
and how that's accelerated
technology becoming
even more a part
of our lives, we're
really, really pushing
into a technological era
to where we're seeing
children that are in school,
and they all have
heads up goggles on.
Like, these full
immersive goggles.
It's even been
said that shouldn't
be until at least in the
teens that you're putting--
>>REGINA: When the
brain is developed.
>>STEWART: Exactly.
And so the biggest thing
about this is we don't know.
And there's so many
things about technology
is like, we just have to defer
to, we don't really know.
And so then you have
to ask yourself,
are we going to
slam on the brakes
or ask for those setting
up the infrastructure
to slam on the brakes?
Because the logic on
the other side is,
well, you can't
stop, because even
if we came up with a treaty,
who's going to be the first--
China, Russia, the
United States--
to have super AI weaponry?
And we'll get into
this in a little bit,
but we are right
now in what's called
an archetypal great
winter period.
>>REGINA: And explain
what you mean by that.
>>STEWART: Well, so in
Strauss-Howe generational
theory--
and there's this amazing book
called "The Fourth Turning."
And the fourth
turning is basically,
that's the winter period, and
it's called the crisis period.
Always followed by
spring, which is a high.
So after a crisis, anything
better or a loosening of that,
it's like after P90X
and you start resting.
You're going to feel great.
The spring period
after that is a high.
Then there's an awakening.
Think back to the '60s and
that kind of a movement.
Then the unraveling.
Think the '80s and '90s with
Nirvana and all the music that
started showing, we're not OK.
This isn't a perfect
utopian world.
And then now we're
back smack dab
in the middle of
a crisis period.
And every 80 to 90 years,
you go back through history
and you'll start seeing this.
And they're always
marked by war.
So 80 to 90 years ago, Great
Depression, World War II.
80 to 90 years before
that, Civil War.
that, Revolutionary War.
Even before that in Europe,
the Glorious Revolution.
And there's representations of
this that go back even further.
And the Etruscans called
this, as pre-Roman,
were calling this the
saeculum, a long life.
And so the interesting
thing about that is we're
in that period right now.
And usually every crisis period,
the greatest weapons of war
come out.
And they're used, and
they're used on the people.
And it ends in, if you're
looking at it historically,
all-out war.
So where is it this time?
Is it coming, or are we
already in the midst of it?
Is it the mind?
Is that the last frontier?
The mind is--
>>REGINA: To co-opt
the mind, because that
is how these wars are won now.
It's all done through battles
of perception and mind
manipulation.
And I mean, I have to say--
and I've said this
on air before--
I went through several
months of feeling depressed
over what had happened to this,
as you call it, a reversion
to tribalism, through this.
I call it a bifurcation of
consciousness on the planet,
and how that was manipulated.
And I find it absolutely
fascinating as kind
of a cultural study, but we're
living in the midst of it.
And so other than
disconnecting from technology--
I mean, again, that's a big one.
How else do we
take back our minds
and have any
sovereignty in an age
where we're being out and out
manipulated in a warlike way?
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Toward warlike ends.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Well, that's such
a good question.
It's really the crux of all of
my work and where it's going.
And you kind of
mentioned it before,
but there's this thing
within the human--
and I call it a human artifact.
It's the inner artist.
And really, it's the culmination
of our inner scientist,
our inner philosopher, and
our inner religious devotee.
And it's the expression
of all of those things.
It has all of that
inherent within it.
And I think these are higher
faculties of consciousness.
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>STEWART: Rudolf Steiner called
these the higher faculties
of consciousness.
And he said, if God
were to ever speak
with you or higher
intelligences,
it may not even
sound like language.
It could just sound like music.
And so you think of the
phenomenology of music
as a language and why
shamans from time immemorial
use drums, rhythm, melody, this
kind of fanciful thing that's
moving over the
predictable rhythm.
>>REGINA: Well, listen to the
literal music culturally itself
through these various archetypal
periods you're talking about.
>>STEWART: Right.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: It represents that.
>>STEWART: And so
to me, I really feel
the solution here is not the
complete checking out of,
I can't deal with this.
Why was I born into
this time period?
Because you mentioned--
>>REGINA: We all just
incarnate into it.
>>STEWART: Right.
And we have the ability.
We do have the ability.
Sometimes it's very
difficult for people
who have gotten into so much
self-talk that disempowers
them, that they feel
that they're afflicted
by external circumstances.
And we become so hypnotized that
this is a punishment of sorts
that we forget that we have,
in a sense through choices
and a series of
choices, woven ourselves
into a feeling of how powerful
or powerless we might be.
And so the inner artist
really is one that will-- you
take a look at
all the tribalism,
and people are infighting
over their differences.
And the artist to me is the
one that steps back and says,
out of this grotesque
horror that we see, how do I
glean beauty from it, and then
start making the beauty what
I will put in front of people
as an artifact to meditate on?
>>REGINA: But that
means taking a beat
and stepping back to begin with.
>>STEWART: For sure.
And the artist isn't
all about creating.
It's a lot about listening.
It's very much so
about listening.
And for me this whole
process was, OK,
there's this left-right paradigm
in politics that's been there
for quite a while,
and there always
seems to be these flare-ups
and talks of insurrection
and the infighting
that's going on.
And it seems a super
hot topic right now.
And we talk about all the
differences and the racism
and the gender inequality, and
how the old paradigm of thought
is too conservative and
we need to loosen it up
to tolerate new forms of
ideas of what we could be.
You were born into this body.
You could be in that body.
I think that's a deconstruction
of a biological archetype,
an earthbound archetype that
was given to us that technology
is saying, hey, if you start
teasing apart these threads
and unraveling
these concepts, then
you could see-- look at all
these movies that we're seeing.
Almost everything is animated
thanks to the current--
not even actors can
get out there and film,
so everything's animated.
Now imagine-- and I don't want
to jump too far ahead-- but--
>>REGINA: Go ahead.
>>STEWART: By 6G--
Alison McDowell was talking
about this thing called
sentient world simulation.
And this is a real thing
that's being built.
But it's basically taking
real-time big data, all
these separate silos, and
networking them together.
And in real time, having
a simulation of a world.
So for Regina, there's
several different avatars
that can be put through several
different computer simulations
with this news that arrives
at her phone or whatever.
She could act this way, this
way, this way, this way.
What are the most likely
ways, and how do we
capitalize on it either for--
whatever.
Like, monetary--
>>REGINA: Are we there already?
Basically?
>>STEWART: Yes--
>>REGINA: Through
the manipulation of--
>>STEWART: NSA, DARPA, DOD.
A lot of these are
connected silos.
But people like
Nick Bostrom, he's
one of the foremost
thinkers on transhumanism.
Oxford University philosopher.
I try and listen
to all these people
so I don't go too far into
my thought experiments
and then start thinking
that it's real.
By the way, I'm not academic.
I'm an artist.
So as I come here, I came from
being a musician that tripped
and fell into being a filmmaker.
And I find myself
at the precipice
of all these conversations,
so I try and humble myself.
But when I start looking
at it, that liberty
of being the artist
allows me to loosen myself
from the rigorous
scrutiny of academia.
And what that does, what Nick
Bostrom is basically saying
is there are a lot of big data
silos that are not connected.
And we will notice--
we may not know
what it came from,
but we will notice
when these big data
silos start connecting.
But it's almost like--
>>REGINA: What will be
the hallmark of that?
>>STEWART: Well, the
hallmark of it would be,
you notice how social media
became an umbrella that
changed content creation.
It changed a lot of
different markets.
How do we advertise to people?
It became a monopoly
in all that.
It's a social machine.
It's taking machine learning and
then it's taking social media
and then turning it into
something like Amazon, which
is, OK, how do we extract
value and resources from it
within governmental guidelines
and laws and stuff like that?
So basically, it's an
algorithm to extract resources
from the Earth based
upon our consent,
and we don't even
know how we give
our consent in this respect.
You're a part of Facebook.
You've already
given your consent
to how it will read your mind.
There's this technology about
actually reading your mind,
which we can get into.
But to stay on point, the
sentient world simulation
is basically this
real-world simulation
that is going to connect with
the international barcode
of life.
And I'm going to try not to
throw out too many names,
but this international
barcode of life,
I think this is the one that's
partnered with Microsoft
and huge heavy hitters
that want to put a QR
code to every living
thing on the planet
so your phone can identify
every living thing.
>>REGINA: Toward what end?
>>STEWART: Well, that's
a very good question.
I think the end game of
this isn't as dire as--
I mean, a lot of
people are saying,
we are building and coding
our own prison planet,
our own slave planet that
knows every move that we make.
And I don't think that's wrong.
I question what intentions
are bringing us there.
What's actually-- what's
leading the way for it?
Because a lot of us, we love the
fact that we can take a phone
and see what constellation
that is or identify that plant.
So we are demanding
it in many ways.
>>REGINA: We are.
>>STEWART: So in a very Charles
Eisensteinian way of saying
this--
because I was actually literally
just talking to him two days
ago.
And he was saying, the
thing about conspiracy,
there's the mythological realm.
We know that
conspiracy is there,
but when we really try
and tease apart who
and how do we bring
accountability,
there's this legal system that
it's all limited liability.
Well, you can't blame
this person at Microsoft.
You have to sue Microsoft.
Then who is harmed
when you sue Microsoft?
Is Microsoft an
entity that makes--
like, Microsoft
intends on making
a third-stranded synthetic
DNA as an external hard drive.
Wait, does Microsoft
intend anything,
or is it the people
there that intend?
But it's not any one individual,
so what is this epiphenomena?
So it's kind of like tribalism.
It has its own mind in that way.
So there's this thing
that's building up.
And I think in the
next few years,
it will become evident that
it has completely married.
>>REGINA: It has infiltrated
every aspect of our awareness.
>>STEWART: Right.
And it's all the way down to
what we originally were saying.
It's the battle for the
mind, because George Orwell--
>>REGINA: For consciousness.
>>STEWART: Well, and
there's several people
who say really, if people
know they're being oppressed,
they will always fight back.
There will always be a revolt.
>>REGINA: But when
you don't know--
>>STEWART: When they don't know,
and they're blissed out on MDMA
and haptic suits that make them
feel like they're in an orgasm
for three hours because
now that's on the market,
then in a world where 2/3
of the internet is already
pornography--
>>REGINA: What are you
going to rebel against?
>>STEWART: Right.
People already love it And
also, where is accountability?
Nobody knows anymore.
That line has become
completely blurred.
And then you look
at, can we even use
video of somebody committing
a crime against them
anymore because of deepfakes
and all these types of things?
So you can see, well, that
looks exactly like this human.
I know exactly what
that person looks like.
It walks, it moves,
talks just like them.
And that person commits a
crime, but it's a video.
Can we go into the metadata?
Oh, no.
That was washed out.
So can we use that as evidence
to incriminate this person?
Sorry, no, because
of deep fakes,
there's always reasonable doubt.
So does that change the
entire legal system now?
We can't use video
evidence anymore
once the precedent is set?
>>REGINA: It's down to the
question of what's real
and-- what's real?
What's real?
>>STEWART: I think
the very next step
is we're not going to
have presidents anymore.
>>REGINA: Right.
I agree.
>>STEWART: At what
point are we a cyborg?
If you get a new arm,
are you a cyborg?
Eh, not yet.
You still have all
your faculties.
You might as well--
>>REGINA: You just have a
little technological assist.
>>STEWART: Right.
And then a new heart.
And what if somebody--
like, I think Dick Cheney
had no heartbeat at some point.
I heard that.
>>REGINA: A lot of jokes
were made about that.
>>STEWART: Right.
And I don't want to go deep
into that, but think about it.
Who would say no, I don't
want a president that
doesn't have a heartbeat?
Because there are a lot of
people who say, that to me
is a prerequisite to
knowing that you're actually
compassionate.
And some would
say, well, where's
your peer-reviewed
evidence on that?
NIH hasn't funded that yet.
Sorry.
We have a president with
no heartbeat, no real legs,
and yeah, now there's some
neural lace technology,
like the Neuralink, the
embedded technologies.
And are those thoughts
actually theirs?
Who's coming up with this?
>>REGINA: But we're
already in that position.
>>STEWART: We are.
>>REGINA: It's just deepening.
The confusion and the blurriness
of the lines is deepening.
>>STEWART: So I put it into
human 1.0 or humanity 1.0.
That's what biology gave us.
Humanity 2.0 is
where we're at now.
And there's a lot
of debate where
in the line of humanity
2.0 we are on the road
to humanity 3.0, which
is, if we ever get there
and if it's even possible
to take your consciousness
and put it into technology so
you don't have to have a body.
You're not confined by
what biology gave you.
All those pesky confines
of having an aching back,
you know, all those types of
things, that's humanity 3.0.
So we're in humanity 2.0.
At what point do we
really start questioning?
Because right now,
everyone says we already
have people that come home from
war and they have prosthetics,
and these prosthetics
are incredible.
AAMIs, Antagonist Agonist
Myoneural Interfaces.
Incredible types of prosthetics.
OK.
And then that starts
blurring that line.
And eventually we
get to the point
where, where does the human
actually end at that point?
And where does the human stop--
>>REGINA: That's not interfering
with your consciousness
nor your decision
making processes yet.
Right?
>>STEWART: Is it?
That's the thing.
We just-- I mean, how do you--
>>REGINA: To get a
well-functioning leg
that seems a part of your body.
>>STEWART: What is our
science institution?
How would we answer that
question of, does losing
an arm change your psyche?
A lot of people
say absolutely yes.
Does getting it back
in bionic form just
return you back to normal,
or is it forever changed?
So to me--
>>REGINA: Psychologically.
Yeah.
I hear you on that.
>>STEWART: There's this
book called "The Humachine"
that even posed the
question, at what point do we
have AI for president?
Right?
And so the thing is a lot
of people would be like,
well, I would need to
know the reasoning.
A president could
at least tell you
the reasoning
behind bombing Syria
or some other kind of act.
They can at least tell
you their reasoning.
And we can sit there and say,
I like this person or I don't.
I agree with their
logic or I don't.
Now they're trying to
get Siri in your phone
to be able to explain its
logic on how it came up
with the calculation.
But eventually,
at what point are
those lines blurred
to the point to where
the legal system, privacy, all
these fundamental linchpins
of why we arrived at the
Constitution of the United
States at all anyway,
when that starts eroding,
we still see the Constitution.
We see the surface where
everything was normal.
But everything underneath, the
foundation is fundamentally
changing to where
eventually, some
thought leaders are
going to get together
just like our forefathers
did and say, a revolution
is already upon us.
Because they weren't saying,
we need to start a revolution.
The revolution is already there.
We already know
what we need to do.
How do we make it and put it
as an idea for generations
to come so we can
still uphold this idea?
And did they think that
was going to last forever?
Did they think the Constitution
So we really have to start
taking a look at, how long
do empires really last?
>>REGINA: A whole other subject.
Yes, indeed.
>>STEWART: 250 years.
>>REGINA: That's the average.
That is correct.
And then you have
to re-think it.
You have to restructure it.
You have to go through
your revolution,
and it's usually not peaceful.
>>STEWART: And so I want you
to get to the next question,
but the very next thing about
that is everything in biology
has its life cycle.
And we're talking
about longevity
and getting rid of death
as if it's a pesky nuance.
So even the death of
empires, is it important?
Like, why do we get rid--
I wouldn't say
get rid of humans.
Could you make a philosophical
argument of the death of humans
is to make way for new
life with new ideas.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
I've said this many times.
Would I want to be in
this vehicle forever?
No.
I want to try
something different
that has a whole other
set of capabilities,
different creative kind
of inputs, and so forth.
I mean, I don't
understand the attachment
to wanting to live-- this whole
notion, the original transhuman
movement, a lot of the stuff
out of MIT, to live forever.
Immortality was the goal.
Why?
Nothing lives forever.
Nothing.
Not even our cosmos
lives forever.
And so yeah, I mean,
that's something
we have to ask
ourselves, how deeply
we choose to engage with it.
What is the fear driving that?
And one thing I wanted
you to launch off on here,
because it's very important,
and it's what you said earlier.
You're an artist.
You have a flexible mind.
You have a creative mind.
And every one of us
has an internal artist
if we choose to
access that part.
The thing about being an
artist is having the ability
for independent thought.
And that's what's being
overridden right now
is independent thought.
So let's now talk about
the artist's way forward.
>>STEWART: OK.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK?
Because we can see,
we've got a plethora
of potentials and
potential problems
we're going to have to
ultimately deal with.
So let's start now.
>>STEWART: Yeah, absolutely.
You're definitely right.
So the artist really stems from
that artifact of consciousness,
the ability to listen and to
take all the resources, all
the input, everything
that we know,
and then also the openness
to the downloads of something
novel or salient.
There's neurochemical things
that happen in the brain,
and a lot of people
try and get into,
that's the explanation of it.
I think what's happening in the
brain is a correlation of it,
and so we shouldn't--
that's another part
of the transhumanism
is taking a look at the
wetware of the brain,
reproducing it, and
thinking that's all
that there was to the story.
>>REGINA: No, not.
[LAUGHS]
>>STEWART: Right.
>>REGINA: Confusing
it with mind.
>>STEWART: Right.
Exactly.
And so the artist,
really to me, here
is why I'm actually super
hopeful about what's
going on in the world,
is because there's
something about crisis.
And I think it was John
F. Kennedy who pointed out
the Chinese symbol for crisis
and opportunity are identical.
So there's something about that.
There's an element,
these dueling dragons.
Like, yes, there has
to be the challenge.
There's the pressure on the
coal that creates the diamond.
And then there's that thing
that emerges out of it.
And so we love escaping
suffering and going for pain,
but-- or I'm sorry, escaping
pain and suffering and going
for pleasure.
There's something deeply
about the artist that
takes suffering and pain
and draws forth the beauty
from within it, and
represents it in a new way,
and really shows there's
that sovereignty of choice
and decision making, which at
present hasn't been eradicated.
So we're talking about
linking our minds to computer
and cloud-based technology.
And eventually, that can
become the singular mind.
This is the whole
post-human idea.
It's after transhumanism is
having that singular mind.
And where does the artist go?
And there's a lot of people
that are just saying, listen,
this is where
technology always went.
Single-celled organisms
had to combine so you
can have your experience.
Let's make way for
the next thing.
And in a sense, I agree,
or I understand the logic.
But where that strips
out the accountability
is, where are you taking care
of you in the here and now?
What is your soul telling you?
In the here and
now is important.
>>REGINA: Are you
even listening?
>>STEWART: Right.
Because the hugest thing
about the transhuman thing
is the removal of our
own accountability.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>STEWART: And that feels great.
>>REGINA: Overriding
internal messages
with external messaging.
>>STEWART: Right.
And so the very crucial,
important task of the artist
nowadays are--
I mean, especially
right now in history
is at this important
juncture to get back
to some of the
primal meeting places
where the artist would
always come out as well.
So cultivate the environment
where the artist always
seems to emerge.
And that's community.
That's always community.
>>REGINA: Where does
nature factor into this?
>>STEWART: Right.
And I include
nature in community,
because when I
think of community,
I really do think back to--
did you ever read the
"Anastasia" books?
>>REGINA: Yes, I
read all of them.
>>STEWART: "Ringing Cedars."
>>REGINA: Loved them.
>>STEWART: Yes.
There's some way that
they talk about how
you need to introduce
the bees, and you
need to introduce
the different insects
and the different plants.
And you take the seeds.
You put them under your tongue.
You let that fuse--
>>REGINA: Genetic information.
Yeah.
>>STEWART: You plant
the thing from seed.
It grows into your medicine.
You eat it.
Like, wow.
What a closed loop system.
That's what the artist
would really do.
To me, that's what
the ultimate artist,
not just the narrow artist.
So we're talking about
narrow AI and general AI.
Narrow AI can only solve the
problem that it's been chosen--
like chess or
something like that.
General AI will be once
AI learns to learn.
It learns how to learn.
And it comes up with new,
novel ways on how to learn.
I think that's already here.
We're in a sense recreating
what's already there,
and we're marveling at it
like, look what we did.
And we're forgetting,
no, no, no.
We downloaded this
and we transferred it
to another medium, probably
not even perfectly.
And we're negating
the gift of biology.
And this is where Charles
Eisenstein comes in.
He's talking about
our gifts are what
we need to serve humanity with.
And--
>>REGINA: The amount of
intelligence in our biology
is being completely
overlooked in all of this.
Looking to outside
technology and sensors
to, say, for
example, tell us how
our body's doing when this
incredible intelligence is
emanating it from it and
speaking to us all the time.
No, don't listen to that.
Listen to what this guy or
what this machine over here
has to say.
That's a very
simplistic way in which
this discouragement from
listening to our own self
is happening.
The medical field
is one of them.
The educational
field is another one.
Every institutional field is
rife with encouraging us not
to listen to our
native intelligence,
biological intelligence,
intuition, and instincts.
Not cool.
And now you add AI to it.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
And so for me, I wonder--
I really take a look
at the complexity
and also where this agenda
has been moving through.
There are a lot of key players
that the names haven't changed,
so there's definitely
some accountability that
needs to be looked at here.
But then there's also
going back into time
and taking a look at things
like the educational system.
That is a perfect--
if you wanted to look at
a perfect prerequisite
to the transhuman agenda--
because what is the
educational system?
It's not Plato's
idea of education,
meaning drawing forth
our inner brilliance
and our inner intelligence.
It's programming.
It should be rightly
called programming.
Because you look what
they did in Hawaii.
You're not allowed to
speak your language.
You were savages and
primitives before we came--
>>REGINA: You are preaching
to the choir on this one.
It needs to be completely
overhauled and stripped down
to its studs and
organically created
for each community, each
region of the world.
>>STEWART: So that
to me is the future.
And this is where
I really stand.
I feel that-- whenever
I hear of these brand
new methods that people
are using to engage back
with their own
innate intelligence,
they all have very similar
categories that they
fall into, common
denominators of what life
has always kind of bounced
around within, the terrains.
And another thing is we need to
get this down to the children,
and we need to revamp
what education really is.
And so introducing play
again is the original way
all mammals and probably
even prior to that,
it's how we learn.
And through things
like-- it may seem
pretty just primitive for dogs
to wrestle and rah, rah, rah.
And then you see little kids
wrestling and stuff like that.
How else do they
know how to work
their myofascial and
neuromyofascial and
neuromuscular wetware?
How do they know how to
work this thing in gravity
and with such lush
dynamics as nature
and contending with
the microbes that you
get under your fingernails?
You have to play.
You have to go out and explore.
This is where 6G
infrastructure, which
is the habitat for
cyborgs, it's literally--
think of a terrarium.
Oh, I'm going to put twigs
and sticks and leaves inside
of a glass thing, and
I'll put a frog in there,
and it'll feel super at home.
That to me is 5G, 6G, and
pretty much all the Gs.
But we're going to start seeing
it more as a cyborg terrarium.
And it's more habitable
like all the smart cities,
which there are hundreds
in China right now.
You're literally walking
around inside of a device.
And how many people of the
populace are really saying,
this is super weird?
No.
We're just taking to
it like that individual
took to that leg and said,
this is an extension of me.
Two things I want to say.
That's a brilliant
aspect of our wetware
that your neurology can
find new, novel ways
to take external stimuli
and revision what's
happening in the outside world.
Real quick.
David Eagleman did a TED Talk
where he had somebody hooked up
to a vest.
And it was just sending
sensory inputs like touch
to the chest and the back.
And it was just done
in a symbolic way,
but in a consistent way, enough
for the neurology of the person
to be able to translate the
seemingly innocuous messages
coming through these little
touch patterns on the body,
to translate a noise to a
deaf person through touch
so they can throw a ball
through a basketball hoop,
and things along those lines.
So translating what's happening
out here through different
means so we can still see.
And now you have people
like Daniel Kish.
Do you know who that is?
>>REGINA: No, I don't.
>>STEWART: He went
blind at age five,
and his parents were like, do
you want to be a blind kid,
or do you want to be like
all the rest of your friends
for the rest of your life?
And he said, I
want to be normal.
They said, get up on your bike.
Start riding your bike around.
And he would crash,
and they would not
let him go into the
pity party thing.
He eventually
started echolocating.
He would just do these little--
[CLICK] with his mouth.
And you see him now
walking around with a cane.
He still uses it.
But he can stand
inside of a gazebo
and be like, oh, well,
there's a pole over here.
There's this weird--
it's not a full roof,
but it's like maybe a lattice.
>>REGINA: And we have
that innate capability.
>>STEWART: It's already in us.
>>REGINA: It's already in us.
I did those experiments
with some shaman
where they go somewhere
like 50 yards away.
Everything's silent.
And you have to find them
blindfolded and touch them.
It's not that hard to do.
These are already
innate abilities.
>>STEWART: Right.
So you notice how we're getting
so fascinated by the technology
that a lot of it-- not most
of it-- but a lot of it
is pointing us back
at our own potential,
and we don't see it that way.
>>REGINA: We don't
see it that way.
So that's the beauty in this
is that it's showing us--
potentially showing
us our potential.
>>STEWART: We need to reframe--
>>REGINA: We need to reframe it.
So we have almost no time left.
I'm going ask you in
just a half a sentence,
scariest thing on the horizon,
most beautiful, hopeful thing
on the horizon in
your viewpoint.
>>STEWART: Hmm.
Scariest thing on
the horizon would
be that we are going to create
this simulated environment
that we've been talking about.
Like, are we living
inside of a simulation?
I don't think we are.
I think we're building
it and preparing people
with the argument to not notice
with all these animated movies
and stuff like that.
That's probably the
scariest, because we
won't know what revolt
even means by that point.
And our agency, that word
agency and sovereignty of choice
will be eradicated.
Could be eradicated.
But to me, there's always--
and this is the most--
>>REGINA: The most hopeful.
>>STEWART: The most hopeful
is the fact that I think--
you notice how there are some
people who listen to records,
and they hear CDs
and they're like,
no, the analog is
better than the digital.
Most people can't tell.
But the real ones who
are listening, they can.
Nothing will beat
what biology gave us.
That's what I really feel.
And it's always there.
It really is always there.
And I even think if we do
find a way to disembody,
it doesn't mean it's impossible
to find our way back.
It's just going to
make it a lot harder.
So please, people, let's make
sure we don't go all the way
to that post-human world.
Maybe there's a way to cohabit.
Maybe there is.
And this is what
the artists wants.
>>REGINA: Use the
best of technology,
but stay within the intelligence
of the biological world.
>>STEWART: And understand this.
We've got this, because
we've always had this.
Don't disempower yourself by
believing the outside world
is too tricky for
you to navigate
so you throw your hands up.
Start getting back in touch
with the inner artist.
Meditation,
contemplative exercises.
Use your body,
play, and community.
>>REGINA: Couldn't
agree more with you.
And ultimately, it will become
and it is already a choice.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You have a choice.
So thank you so much, Ben.
The time has flown.
It seems like it's five
minutes, and obviously we'll
do this again.
>>STEWART: Perfect.
>>REGINA: We didn't even get
to the last three pages or so.
[LAUGHTER]
Thank you so much for
coming here again.
>>STEWART: You're welcome.
>>REGINA: Loads of
information to consider here.
You might want to
watch this one again.
Meanwhile, you can check
out Ben's work here on Gaia.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]